# CitiBike-Challenge

This project examines CitiBike data from the last 6 months (Jersey City). A Jupyter notebook (Python) was used to join multiple raw data files from the CitiBike website, standardize string and datetime formats, and discard outlier or null values. A Tableau workbook is used to visualize the data and provide some end analysis.
The analysis from the Tableau story is repeated and added to here.

Slide 1: There are 79 bike stations. The blue-red gradient illustrates how popular bike stations are as ride START locations. The size of the markers represent how popular bike stations are as ride END locations. Zip code data is also shown. There is a relationship between color and size of marker, signifying that stations that are popular as start locations (redder) are also popular end locations (larger). This makes sense intuitively, if we assume people are biking both to and from their destinations, i.e. for any trip a station is involved in, it has more or less an equal chance of being either the start or end destination. Zip codes 07030 and 07310 seem to have a high concentration of popular stations. This is near JC's downtown area, where there is a lot of pedestrian traffic and parking/traffic may be complicated. As is the case in many cities, people also may not own cars in this area.

Slide 2: This map shows the 5 most popular stations from the last 6 months and the 5 least popular stations (number of total rides). Geographically, the more popular stations are further northeast in the city and more tightly clustered together. The number of people that pass through this area is most likely higher here than in the areas with less popular stations, affecting how many rides are taken. It is worth noting that just because the popular stations have a higher number of rides taken to/from them (by definition), it does not necessarily mean the bikes from these stations are ridden for longer. In fact, the opposite seems to be true. The rides taken from popular stations are rarely for longer than 25 minutes - rides from unpopular stations tend to last much longer. Furthermore, some of the less popular stations are newer bikes, only having been introduced in summer of 2021. This could also be a factor in their being categorized as less popular. There is no clear trend between time of year and length of averge trip (minutes).

Slide 3: In the map, red stations have a higher ratio of casual riders to members than blue stations. We see that the northern and southern bike stations are more likely to have casual rides, while some of the more central stations see more memberships. One theory for this is: the outskirts of the area are less walkable, so casual riders could feel more incentivized to pay for a bike. The bottom chart shows that the number of casual riders is increasing more quickly than memberships. During March 2021 - May 2021, members significantly outnumbered casual riders. The last 2 months have shown more rides taken by casual bikers than by members. The trip duration (min) chart shows that casual bikers take longer trips than members. This makes sense from the customer point of view: casual riders have a higher cost per trip, so they may only want to opt to bike over walking for longer trips. Members on the other hand, may feel justified in biking to nearby locations or biking more often in general since their cost per trip is lower.

Suggestion: I believe it would beneficial to the program to revert the data format to how it used to be in 2020 and before. The data format/fields used in the most recently available data is missing a lot of valuable information that the previous data format managed to include (e.g. trip duration, age segmentation, bike ID). Trip duration has to be computed manually right now, which just adds more work to the analyst. Gender and age are not necessary fields to track our bikes, but they certainly could be helpful in the way of marketing. Lastly, it is very difficult to make a bike maintenance recommendation with no bike ID being recorded during trips. Knowing which stations are popular is certainly useful when it comes to planning new stations or maintenance on stations/docks themselves, but we currently have no way of knowing which bikes are used more or how long specific bikes have been in use. 